Human rights panel to hear Navajo uranium contamination case: Associated Press
21 Oct 2021 , Susan Montoya Bryan

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — A group representing Navajo communities is presenting its case to an international human rights body, saying U.S. regulators violated the rights of tribal members when they cleared the way for uranium mining in western New Mexico.
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — A group representing Navajo communities is presenting its case to an international human rights body, saying U.S. regulators violated the rights of tribal members when they cleared the way for uranium mining in western New Mexico.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights based in Washington, D.C., decided earlier this year that the petition filed a decade ago by Eastern Navajo Diné Against Uranium Mining was admissible. With additional testimony and exhibits being filed Thursday, the commission is expected to hold a hearing in the spring.

Lawyers for the Navajo group said the commission’s decision to hear the case marks the first time that the panel has found admissible a petition filed on behalf of an Indigenous community. It’s the second time for the panel to consider an environmental justice case against the United States. The first was a petition by Mossville Environmental Action Now regarding high cancer rates within impoverished communities in parts of Louisiana.

“Our filing today is crucial for the protection of our Diné communities, our people, our homeland, and our culture,” Jonathan Perry, director of the Navajo group, said in a statement. “We will stand for our human rights and not allow our value as Indigenous People to be diminished. The federal government must realize that we are not disposable and that water is life.”

On the Navajo Nation, uranium mining has left a legacy of death, disease and environmental contamination. That includes the largest spill of radioactive material in the United States, when 94 million gallons of tailings and wastewater spewed onto tribal lands in the Church Rock area in western New Mexico in 1979. It happened just three months after the partial meltdown of a nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania, which got far more attention at the time.

Hundreds of abandoned uranium mines and radioactive waste still have to be cleaned up across the Navajo Nation. Tribal President Jonathan Nez recently said residents of the nation’s largest Indigenous reservation have been exposed to dangerous levels of radiation for years and have endured a wide range of illnesses as a result, with some dying prematurely.

The Navajo Nation recently signed a joint proclamation in support of the group’s petition. Several individual Navajo chapters have passed their own resolutions, and the Oglala Sioux Tribe in South Dakota submitted a letter of support.

During a legislative session this week, Navajo lawmakers passed a measure that requests Congress host hearings regarding uranium mining, its long-term outcomes and reclamation efforts. The sponsor, Council Delegate Kee Allen Begay Jr., said it will be important for Congress to hear directly from the Navajo people.

According to the human rights petition, the U.S. government failed to protect the human rights of Indigenous communities when the Nuclear Regulatory Commission licensed Hydro Resources Inc. to build and operate in situ leach mines — in which chemicals are used to dissolve minerals out of the formation — near Crownpoint and Church Rock.

Hydro Resources is now known as NuFuels, a subsidiary of the Canadian mining company Laramide Resources. The company did not immediately respond to questions about the claims or future plans for mining at the site.

The Navajo group is making several requests, including that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission rescind or not renew the company’s mining license and that the federal government respect Navajo law and prioritize cultural views and practices. The group also is asking that a remediation plan be created and an environmental assessment be conducted of the effects of uranium mining and milling.

Eric Jantz, an attorney with the New Mexico Environmental Law Center, has worked on the case for two decades. He said the legal battle has been emotionally draining particularly for those who live near the site because the threats of uranium mining have been hanging over their heads every day for decades.

Community members Rita Capitan and Christine Smith said they have been speaking out about the dangers of contamination as a way to protect future generations and prevent further damage to natural resources that their communities depend on.

“Water is sacred. Water is life. Water is alive and water has rights and we all as human beings have a right to have good water,” Capitan said during a news conference. “We’ve got to do it for our generations to come.”

 

Navajo group alleges uranium mining violates human rights: Albuquerque Journal [NM]
21 Oct 2021 , Theresa Davis

Christine Smith, a first grade teacher at Crownpoint Elementary in northwest New Mexico, lives a few hundred feet from a processing plant for a proposed uranium mine. Smith said she worries about how a revival of uranium mining in the region could affect the health of her students and family. “Even though the mining companies kept coming back and saying it was a safe process … we’ve seen many accidents in the past,” Smith said. “No company will ever convince me that one process is 100% safe.”
Christine Smith, a first grade teacher at Crownpoint Elementary in northwest New Mexico, lives a few hundred feet from a processing plant for a proposed uranium mine.
Smith said she worries about how a revival of uranium mining in the region could affect the health of her students and family.

“Even though the mining companies kept coming back and saying it was a safe process … we’ve seen many accidents in the past,” Smith said. “No company will ever convince me that one process is 100% safe.”

Smith is a member of Eastern Navajo Diné Against Uranium Mining, a group that has successfully brought a petition to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.

The petition alleges that the U.S. and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission violated Navajo human rights when it granted Hydro Resources Inc./NuFuels a license to mine uranium in Church Rock and Crownpoint.

This is only the second time that the Washington, D.C.-based human rights organization has found an environmental justice petition against the U.S. admissible.

Eric Jantz, an attorney with the New Mexico Environmental Law Center representing the Navajo group in the case, called the petition an “important milestone” in a decades-long legal battle.

“(It’s not just about) how many parts per million of uranium go through an aquifer, or how (much) radiation people are inhaling into their lungs, but fundamental human rights,” Jantz said. “The rights to have clean air, clean water, clean land, and to fundamentally live your life as an Indigenous person, or any person, without fear of having your lifeways destroyed by the government.”

The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that 30 million tons of uranium ore were extracted from Navajo lands from 1944 to 1986. The materials were instrumental in the U.S. nuclear weapons program.

Community resistance to the HRI/NuFuels project goes back to 1994.

Environmental impact statements from the NRC about a new proposed mine began showing up in local mailboxes, and residents organized to raise concerns about the plan.

Federal regulators in 1998 approved the license to mine uranium at three different McKinley County sites using the in situ leach method.

The method injects water and chemicals through underground wells to dissolve uranium.

Uranium is then processed into “yellowcake” and used for nuclear fuel.

According to the NRC, the Crownpoint site currently has no active operations.

The Navajo group originally filed the petition in 2011 with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, which found the petition admissible earlier this year.

The groups submitted more testimony on Thursday as part of the petition process.

A 1979 disaster at the now-closed Church Rock uranium mill north of Gallup sent 93 million gallons of radioactive waste into the Puerco River.

Uranium exposure can cause organ damage and cancer.

A University of New Mexico research study showed that at least 25% of adult Navajo participants had uranium in their urine at concentrations higher than 95% of the U.S. population.

Rita Capitan, the Navajo Crownpoint chapter president and a co-founder of Eastern Navajo Diné Against Uranium Mining, said another mine could further harm “precious water and land.”

“Why allow another company to come in and begin operating uranium mining again when nothing’s been cleaned up?” Capitan said.

Earlier this year, the EPA awarded contracts totaling $220 million to three companies to clean up 50 abandoned uranium mine sites near Grants and on the Navajo Nation.

There are about 500 abandoned sites on the tribal land.

The petition alleges that the NRC licensed the mine while knowing that it would contaminate groundwater.

The groups say that the company had not shown that its proposed cleanup methods could restore groundwater to pre-mining conditions.

This week the Navajo Nation government lent their support to the petition.

Navajo President Jonathan Nez, Vice President Myron Lizer and Navajo Council Speaker Seth Damon signed a proclamation on Thursday, urging the commission to recognize uranium mining as an “ongoing assault on Diné lands, resources and people.”

“The United States has continued to allow private corporations to extract vast quantities of uranium from Diné lands, abandoning and leaving behind mountains of radioactive and toxic waste,” the leaders wrote in the proclamation.

Several Navajo chapters have issued resolutions supporting the petition.

The commission could hold a hearing on the petition as early as next year.

The advocacy groups said that a “favorable decision” from the commission — essentially a conclusion that the U.S. government violated the communities’ human rights when licensing the project — could be helpful in future litigation seeking to rescind the license.

“It’s past time that the United States’s nuclear policy is scrutinized, and that human rights violations … are taken to account and are scrutinized,” Jantz said.

Theresa Davis is a Report for America corps member covering water and the environment for the Albuquerque Journal.

 

Human rights panel will hear case claiming US regulators violated Navajo tribe's rights: report: The Hill
21 Oct 2021 , Monique Beals

A group representing Navajo communities reportedly filed testimony and exhibits on Thursday as it prepares to present its case involving uranium contamination to an international human rights body. The group will assert to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that U.S. regulators violated the rights of tribal members by permitting uranium mining in New Mexico, The Washington Post reported.
A group representing Navajo communities reportedly filed testimony and exhibits on Thursday as it prepares to present its case involving uranium contamination to an international human rights body.
The group will assert to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that U.S. regulators violated the rights of tribal members by permitting uranium mining in New Mexico, The Washington Post reported.

Though uranium mining has been banned in the Navajo Nation since 2005, the petition claims that the human rights of Indigenous people were neglected after the Nuclear Regulatory Commission allowed Hydro Resources, Inc. to operate in situ leach mines, according to the Post.

The Navajo group's petition requests that the mining license be revoked or not renewed, in addition to the government agreeing to respect the culture and laws of the Navajo community and presenting a remediation plan.

"Our filing today is crucial for the protection of our Diné communities, our people, our homeland, and our culture," director of the group Jonathan Perry said, according to the Post. "We will stand for our human rights and not allow our value as Indigenous People to be diminished. The federal government must realize that we are not disposable and that water is life."

The Post reported that uranium mining has brought death, disease and contamination to the Navajo community, with hundreds of abandoned mines and radioactive waste yet to be cleaned up.

Earlier this year, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights decided that a petition filed years ago by the Eastern Navajo Diné Against Uranium was admissible, and a hearing is expected to take place in the spring, the Post reported.

This case marks the second time that the panel has admitted an environmental justice case against the United States. The first involved Mossville Environmental Action Now after high cancer rates were found in some of Louisiana's poor communities, the Post added.

The Hill has reached out to Navajo Nation President Jonathan Nez for more information.

 

Navajo group alleges U.S. violated human rights in uranium mine licensing: The NM Political Report
21 Oct 2021 , Hannah Grover

With historic uranium mine sites already polluting communities, members of the Navajo Nation have been fighting for 27 years to stop a new mining initiative from starting in the Crownpoint and Church Rock areas. On Thursday, the Eastern Navajo Diné Against Uranium Mining took that fight to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, arguing that the United States and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s approval of Hydro Resources Inc. mines violated the human rights of Navajo Nation residents.
With historic uranium mine sites already polluting communities, members of the Navajo Nation have been fighting for 27 years to stop a new mining initiative from starting in the Crownpoint and Church Rock areas.
On Thursday, the Eastern Navajo Diné Against Uranium Mining took that fight to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, arguing that the United States and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s approval of Hydro Resources Inc. mines violated the human rights of Navajo Nation residents.

“For far too long, our Indigenous communities have borne the brunt of environmental racism and of environmental harms,” said Virginia Neochea, the executive director of New Mexico Environmental Law Center, which is representing ENDAUM. “For decades have Indigenous families and communities been targeted for the intentional siting of polluting industries. This intentional and inequitable siting has resulted in direct harm to the community as well as their health, their traditions, and it has violated their fundamental human rights to clean air, land and water, fundamental human rights that we’re all entitled to.”

ENDAUM petitioned the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in March and the commission admitted the case, allowing ENDAUM to file additional observations on the merits of the case this week. ENDAUM is represented by the New Mexico Environmental Law Center and they celebrated what they dubbed as “Filing Day” with a press conference. This filing includes witness testimony and videos.

“We are going to keep fighting in this human rights forum until there is justice for the communities,” said attorney Eric Jantz, who has been working on the case for two decades.

The NRC approved HRI’s license to mine uranium in 1998, four years after ENDAUM began its fight to stop the mining operation from coming to the communities. In Thursday’s filing, ENDAUM alleges that this license approval came despite the fact that NRC knew the mining will contaminate water and that the communities already have increased risk of disease and death from historic uranium mining and milling promoted by the United States.

In addition, many of the residents of Crownpoint and Church Rock were exposed to uranium while working as miners. Larry King was one of those miners and he said he was not told of the dangers related to uranium exposure. King began working in an underground uranium mine in 1975 and continued working there through April of 1983.

“We weren’t ever told about the hazards that would affect our health, being exposed for a length of time to uranium,” he said during the press conference.

The filing further highlights how the uranium mining could impact cultural beliefs.

“Contamination or destruction of the land or any of the Four Sacred Elements such as water, diminishes the Diné culturally, both individually and collectively,” the filing states. “Moreover, the Diné have specific cultural beliefs about uranium and how it should not be disturbed.”

Christine Smith, a Crownpoint resident, can see the site from her house where the mining is proposed to occur. Looking out her window, Smith said she can see the fenceline where the mining property is located. She said she always knew that uranium was going to come back to the area and, after learning that HRI was wanting to start a process known as in-situ leach mining, Smith educated herself about that process. In-situ leaching doesn’t require removing large quantities of ore from the ground. Instead, a solution is used to dissolve the minerals. This allows them to then be pumped out of the ground using an extraction well. It is a common technique for uranium mining in the United States. Smith said the company claimed this mining technique was safe, but that has not reassured her.

She highlighted past incidents leading to environmental contamination.

“No company will ever convince me that the process is 100 percent safe,” she said.

One fear is that uranium mining will permanently damage precious water resources. ENDAUM alleges that the company has not demonstrated that it can restore water resources and that its other operations have been unable to restore water resources to the point that they can be used for anything other than industrial uses.

“Water is life. Water is alive and water has rights,” said Rita Capitan, the cofounder of ENDAUM. “And we all as human beings have the right to have clean water.”

As the United States pushes for more clean energy in the fight against climate change, nuclear power has gained support and attention. But this requires materials like uranium.

“We want to stress the importance of the water issue here on Navajo,” said Jonathan Perry, the ENDAUM director. “And we also will continue to stress the importance of our message that nuclear energy is not clean energy and uranium mining is not welcome on Navajo Nation.”

The Navajo Nation is no stranger to uranium mining. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, nearly 30 million tons of uranium ore was extracted from Navajo Nation lands from 1944 until 1986. This has left hundreds of abandoned mine sites behind as well as superfund sites where mills used to be.

The legacy of uranium extraction has left its mark on the land. King spoke about scanning New Mexico Highway 566 and discovering that it was highly contaminated.

The community of Church Rock has experienced first-hand the devastation that uranium mining can cause when in 1979 a uranium mill broke and 93 million tons of radioactive liquids flowed into the Rio Puerco, killing livestock and destroying crops.

“Why allow another company to come in and operate uranium mining again when nothing’s been cleaned up?” Capitan asked.

The filing has received support of the Navajo Nation and several of the chapters near the proposed mine sites. Jantz said a ruling from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that the licensing had violated Navajo Nation residents’ rights could be used in future litigation or policy discussions.

Additionally, he said such a ruling could be beneficial to other tribes also fighting uranium mining, such as the Oglala Sioux. The Oglala Sioux are among the supporters of the filing and the tribe has been fighting a proposal for a uranium mine in the Black Hills in South Dakota.

“I think it’s important for them to be able to point to, in public forums, a document that says [in-situ leach] mining cannot be done safely, it’s a human rights violation to do it,” he said.

 

As Vernon approves plan for Vermont Yankee site, questions remain about future of nuclear waste: Vermont Public Radio
21 Oct 2021 , Howard Weiss-Tisman

The town of Vernon is considering a new plan that lays out a path forward for the redevelopment of the land around the former Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant. The plan offers a number of options which include housing, industrial development and recreation, and the town seems willing to move forward with using the site — even if high level radioactive waste remains there. Last month the Nuclear Regulatory Commission approved a plan to build a new site in Texas, where nuclear waste from Vermont Yankee would be stored.
The town of Vernon is considering a new plan that lays out a path forward for the redevelopment of the land around the former Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant.
The plan offers a number of options which include housing, industrial development and recreation, and the town seems willing to move forward with using the site — even if high level radioactive waste remains there.

Last month the Nuclear Regulatory Commission approved a plan to build a new site in Texas, where nuclear waste from Vermont Yankee would be stored.

But the state of Texas is fighting that decision, and it’s likely that the waste will remain in Vernon for now.

The industrial demolition company NorthStar Services has been tearing down Vermont Yankee since the beginning of 2019, and NorthStar CEO Scott State recently led a group of reporters on a tour of the plant.

There’s a gaping hole in the floor of the turbine building that goes down three floors.

At the bottom, there's a machine sitting among the twisted shards of steel and pipes that are spread out across the ground level.

The nearby nuclear reactor used to send steam into this building to make the turbines spin. It produced about a third of the energy Vermont used while Vermont Yankee was still running.

But the massive turbine is the latest piece of machinery that’s been cut up and shipped off, as the decommissioning process at Vermont Yankee continues.

“That’s a 60,000-pound machine with a shear on it that removed all of the materials in this space,” State said, pointing out one of the pieces of specialty equipment that was brought in.

Northstar is about a third of the way through the job here. State says most of the heavy work will be done by 2024, and he says the whole project should be completed before the end of 2026.

A nuclear power plant has never been decommissioned in the United States the way it’s being done at Vermont Yankee.

At other plants, the energy companies hire outside contractors to come do the work.

But here in Vernon, Northstar purchased the plant outright.

And that deal included the $600 million that sits in Vermont Yankee's decommissioning trust fund. That's the money rate payers build up to help remove a power facility when it’s reached the end of its useful life.

Northstar saw that pile of money, and figured they could get the job done for a lot less. Whatever is left over at the end will be profit for the company.

"We think, based on what we’ve learned here, we could do, pretty easily, five to six of these at the same time.”

So far, State says things are pretty much going along as planned, and he wants to take what the company’s learned in Vermont and tackle other nuclear plants as they shut down in the coming years.

“You know, at this point in time, there’s been no real surprises here,” State said. “And we think, based on what we’ve learned here, we could do, pretty easily, five to six of these at the same time.”

State expects the company to make about $25 million when the job is done.

Dan Clark is the site manager and he says so far, more than 17,000 tons of low-level radioactive waste has been shipped out by rail car to a waste disposal facility in Texas.

“Some of those boxes, when they’re loaded and full of grout, weigh about 240,000 pounds,” Clark said as a train pulled out. “Some of the boxes have up to five inches thick of steel, as well. That’s for shielding for parts from the reactor."

When the job is done, all of the low level radioactive waste will be buried in Texas.

And the only indication that a nuclear reactor once operated here, along the shores of the Connecticut River, will be the 58 canisters of spent nuclear fuel rods that remain behind.

 

At Arkansas Nuclear One, great power comes with great responsibility: KTHV [AR]
21 Oct 2021 , Skot Covert

As apart of Nuclear Science Week, Meteorologist Skot Covert was granted rare access to Arkansas Nuclear One (ANO) – the state’s only nuclear plant. Located along the banks of Lake Dardanelle in Pope County, Arkansas, Nuclear One is home to two nuclear reactors. Unit 1 was constructed in 1974 and produces 836 megawatts of carbon-free electricity, and Unit 2 came online in 1980 supplying 987 megawatts of electricity.
As apart of Nuclear Science Week, Meteorologist Skot Covert was granted rare access to Arkansas Nuclear One (ANO) – the state’s only nuclear plant.
Located along the banks of Lake Dardanelle in Pope County, Arkansas, Nuclear One is home to two nuclear reactors.

Unit 1 was constructed in 1974 and produces 836 megawatts of carbon-free electricity, and Unit 2 came online in 1980 supplying 987 megawatts of electricity.

ANO produces 82% of the state’s carbon-free electricity, enough to power nearly 1 million households according to Entergy.

But with great power, comes great responsibility.

It’s the heavy burden of responsibility that drives ANO’s commitment to safety and training. Operators of the two unit’s undergo rigorous training and coursework for two years. It’s only after being federally licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that one becomes an operator. Even then, the training never ends.

"So every five weeks they get tested, they have to pass, or they can't go back to the plant,” said Zac Lacy, a senior operations officer at the plant.

With no margin for error, training for any and all types of scenarios is at the very foundation of Entergy’s safety plans. To facilitate such a high degree of proficiency among its operators, all coursework and the required continuing education every six weeks is completed in a simulated control room.

These two simulated control rooms, each unique to the two nuclear reactors on site, are exact replicas on the actual control rooms.

Lacy states the design of simulator goes beyond just the buttons on a control board, but all encompassing of the entire room. From the doors, paint, to clock on the wall – if you walked into the simulator blind-folded it would be difficult to discern between the training facility and the actual control room.

The purpose behind such meticulous detail? Safety and experience. A similar example would be that of a pilot training in a flight simulator.

“We're training them for their worst case scenario to allow them to operate and practice the events that could happen at the plant so they will be prepared,” said Lacy.

The plant is home to over 1,000 employees, only 60 of which work in the control room. The other employees undergo highly specific training as well.

Meteorologist Skot Covert suited up in full anti-contamination gear and worked through a real-life simulation of working in spaces that are radiologically contaminated.

"You know when it comes down to it, we understand the technology, we understand the potential risk that there are and we take that responsibility seriously. But the technology itself, the training, the experience, and the professionalism really raises the level of safety where I have no problem having my wife and my children live in the local community,” said John Dinelli, site Vice President for Entergy.

While there are two reactors, one is more recognizable than the other. Unit 2 utilizes the iconic 447-foot cooling tower that is seen prominently from the River Valley, including Interstate 40 and Highway 64.

"On unit two, we use a cooling tower for cooling the water that goes through the turbine, and on unit one we use Lake Dardanelle. The reason for the difference is we want to make sure we don't put too much heat into Lake Dardanelle,” explains Gary Sullins, a senior staff instructor at ANO.

Each reactor unit is designed to run continuously for 18 months. Then, the plant shuts down for about one month to replace the uranium fuel in the reactor. This is known as an “outage.”

During an outage, hundreds of contractors are brought in to perform maintenance, which more than doubles the amount of employees at the plant.

 

Pueblo County thinks new nuclear reactor technology is a good fit for saving the Comanche power plant: The Denver Gazette
21 Oct 2021 , Scott Weiser

Pueblo County Commissioners are urging Xcel Energy to consider converting its coal-fired Comanche power plant near Pueblo to use nuclear power to spin the existing generators instead of demolishing the plant. Xcel has proposed closing the last of three generating units at the plant by 2040 to help meet Governor Jared Polis’ carbon-free by 2050 mandate. "Pueblo County has been the home of our Comanche Station for more than 40 years, and Xcel Energy remains committed to the area," said Michelle Aguayo, Media Relations Representative for Xcel Energy in a statement to The Denver Gazette. "We are actively engaging with stakeholders on how our proposed plans will impact the community, while working towards our clean energy goals."
Pueblo County Commissioners are urging Xcel Energy to consider converting its coal-fired Comanche power plant near Pueblo to use nuclear power to spin the existing generators instead of demolishing the plant.
Xcel has proposed closing the last of three generating units at the plant by 2040 to help meet Governor Jared Polis’ carbon-free by 2050 mandate.

"Pueblo County has been the home of our Comanche Station for more than 40 years, and Xcel Energy remains committed to the area," said Michelle Aguayo, Media Relations Representative for Xcel Energy in a statement to The Denver Gazette. "We are actively engaging with stakeholders on how our proposed plans will impact the community, while working towards our clean energy goals."

The Commissioners touted new small modular reactor (SMR) technology as a potential alternative to razing the Comanche plant and billing ratepayers for the demolition and site renovation.

Saving that infrastructure for use with SMRs would not only save millions by reusing much of the existing infrastructure, but the converted plant would also continue to support Pueblo and Pueblo County with more than $15 million per year in tax revenues and more than 100 high-paying jobs, according to the commissioners.

While not committing to any particular plan for the plant, Xcel will be presenting its plan to the Colorado Public Utilities Commission in November, which ultimately will decide the fate of the plant and its possible closing date.

Environmental groups argue that phasing out fossil fuels-fired plants like Comanche by the end of the decade is key to preventing the worst effects of climate change.

"We continue to evaluate all of these proposals and suggestions and will reply in total when our response is due in November," said Aguayo.

The new SMR technology developed by Portland, Oregon, company NuScale Power, LLC, promises scalable generating capacity of up to 12 small, individual modular reactors that can be combined in a common reactor building.

NuScale’s patented technology received U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) design approval in August 2020, but no plants have been completed, though there is interest in Canada and Poland.

Each module stands 76 feet tall and 15 feet in diameter and uses only one-twentieth of the amount of nuclear fuel used in a large-scale reactor.

Any module in an array can be taken offline for maintenance or refueling while the other modules are operating, something not possible in traditional nuclear power plants.

The internal design circulates water through the core and into a heat exchanger that boils outside water for steam generation without using any electrically powered pumps. The water circulation inside the reactor uses natural convection, with heated water rising upward into the heat exchanger where it creates steam to turn the generators, and cooler, denser water descending back to the reactor core in a continuous loop. Cooled water from condensed steam is also recirculated.

The entire module is submerged below ground in a pool of water sized to provide long-term external heat absorption that keeps the reactor from overheating as it cools during a shutdown, again without the need for pumps.

The safety implication is that there is always sufficient external cooling capacity to prevent a meltdown such as the one at the 2011 incident at the Fukushima, Japan, nuclear power plant that was caused by failures in coolant circulating pumps. In that event, tsunami flooding destroyed backup generators and emergency power battery banks that ran the pumps for a time were quickly exhausted, leading to a core meltdown.

NuScale’s design does not require electricity to safely shut down the reactor. Gravity drops the control rods into the nuclear core, shutting down the fission reaction if power to the electromagnets holding the control rods up is interrupted.

“NuScale SMRs are particularly well-suited to siting at retiring coal plants, helping host communities like Pueblo County and plant workers participate in the transition to a decarbonized energy system, while also preserving local tax base and continuing to provide local economic benefits,” said NuScale Director of Sales Cheryl Collins. “Additionally, some coal plant infrastructure can be repurposed and reused, such as cooling water delivery systems, potable water, site fire protection, switchyard, and buildings, leading to critical capital cost savings.”

“Looking forward, there are several different technologies that could meet the need for firm generation including fossil gas with carbon capture, green hydrogen use in turbines, long-term storage, and modular reactors,” said Will Toor, Colorado Energy Office executive director in a statement to The Denver Gazette. “As these technologies come forward into resource planning, the state will look at the cost of the technologies, the timing of when they could come online, and whether they support other state environmental and energy policies.”

Not everyone is happy with the proposal, however.

In a guest column in the Pueblo Chieftain, Renewable Energy Coalition of America president Ken Danti accused the county of an “assault” on renewable energy “with no public input.”

Danti had several complaints about the prospect of using nuclear generators at the Comanche plant including:

“Nuclear generation can't be turned on or off quickly during regular operation," Danti said. "It can be turned off fast during an emergency but at great expense.”

But an April 2021 report by the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory analyzing NuScale and another SMR system describes several ways to reduce or increase capacity fairly quickly depending on demand, including taking modules offline for extended periods of low grid demand or changing power output from one or more modules while keeping the output high on others.

Danti also stated that nuclear power is “the most expensive form” of electricity. That has been true in the past, but the new SMR technology substantially closes that gap because, for one thing, the reactors are built in a factory and can be shipped to the site by ship, rail or truck as complete units needing only to be installed and fueled, the PNNL report says.

Danti also points out that the major elephant in the room when it comes to nuclear power is storage of the spent nuclear fuel (SNF).

In 1982 Congress passed the Nuclear Waste Policy Act and in 1987 designated Yucca Mountain, Nevada, as the location that the Department of Energy was allowed to consider for the construction of a national high-level waste repository situated inside the mountain more than a thousand feet below its summit and a thousand feet above the nearest water table.

Yucca Mountain is adjacent to the Nevada Test Site, where nuclear bombs were tested and is 90 miles from Las Vegas. The facility has been kept closed by what the Government Accountability Office said is political reasons, not technical or safety reasons.

This leaves spent nuclear fuel sitting in water-filled pools or in dry-cask storage at 80 reactor sites around the nation, 23 of which are not producing electricity using nuclear fuel, including the Fort St. Vrain generating station near Platteville.

Fort St. Vrain was built in 1979 as one of only two high temperature gas-cooled nuclear power reactors in the United States. After technical problems created financial problems for Public Service Co., now part of Xcel Energy, the plant was shut down in 1989 and was converted to natural gas in 1996, but the spent fuel rods remain underwater on the site.

The handling and storage of spent nuclear fuel has been a problem since nuclear power was invented.

France, whose 56 nuclear power plants produce some 75% of its carbon-free electricity, concluded that underground storage is the optimal plan. The French government has committed 25 billion Euros to excavating storage tunnels 500 meters below ground that will cover 25 square kilometers and will be able to accept spent nuclear fuels for a century.

 

Activists in Santa Fe concerned about plutonium shipping plan: Santa Fe New Mexican [NM]
21 Oct 2021 , Scott Wyland

Santa Fe residents would see shipments of plutonium trucked through the city’s southern edge if federal agencies carry out plans announced nearly a year ago. The prospect worries activists, local officials and some residents because plutonium is far more radioactive than the waste — contaminated gloves, equipment, clothing, soil and other materials — shipped from Los Alamos National Laboratory to the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant, an underground disposal site near Carlsbad.
Santa Fe residents would see shipments of plutonium trucked through the city’s southern edge if federal agencies carry out plans announced nearly a year ago.
The prospect worries activists, local officials and some residents because plutonium is far more radioactive than the waste — contaminated gloves, equipment, clothing, soil and other materials — shipped from Los Alamos National Laboratory to the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant, an underground disposal site near Carlsbad.

The U.S. Department of Energy issued a notice of intent in December to begin the process for an environmental impact statement as one of the first steps toward diluting and disposing of plutonium left from the Cold War.

The notice hints that “downblending” the plutonium would be necessary to reduce radioactivity enough for the waste to be accepted at WIPP, which only takes low-level nuclear waste.

Opponents’ main concern is the 26 metric tons of cast-off plutonium bomb cores, or pits, that are being kept at the Pantex Plant in Amarillo, Texas.

This plutonium would be sent to the Los Alamos lab where it would be turned into an oxide powder, and then the powder would be shipped to the Savannah River Site in South Carolina, where it would be further diluted before returning to New Mexico for storage at WIPP.

That would mean a more hazardous substance would be transported twice on N.M. 599 and U.S. 84/285 — when the plutonium comes in from Pantex and when the lab ships the powder, which can be highly toxic if released, said Cindy Weehler, who co-chairs the watchdog group 285 ALL.

“It will change the amount of transportation risk that we’re exposed to,” Weehler told an audience gathered for a town hall meeting Tuesday at the Nancy Rodriguez Community Center in Santa Fe.

The Energy Department is quietly putting these plans in place, Weehler said. She called the secrecy unacceptable, arguing people have a right to know if they’ll be at risk.

Agency officials didn’t respond to emailed questions on whether the Biden administration aims to move ahead with a Trump-era decision to dilute and dispose of the plutonium and, if so, what the timeline would be.

Although the agency is saying little about its plans, the National Academy of Sciences describes how the Cold War plutonium would be transported, reconstituted and disposed of at WIPP in its April 2020 analysis.

The lab is the only place where plutonium can be changed into a powdered form, and WIPP is the only site in the country that takes nuclear weapons waste, so the increased hauling of these materials through New Mexico would be unavoidable, said Don Hancock, director of nuclear waste safety for the nonprofit Southwest Research and Information Center.

“It’s disingenuous to say some of it might go someplace else when there is no someplace else,” Hancock said.

N.M. 599 was designed so nuclear materials being trucked to and from the lab would bypass the heart of Santa Fe.

But Weehler contends if a truck accident caused a breach in a container, it could still endanger some neighborhoods, especially if the plutonium powder is released.

The powder is toxic to breathe in — the fine grains can embed in the lungs, causing respiratory problems — and it can contaminate soil so extensively it’s impossible to purge, she said.

Aside from concerns about local communities, the plutonium will travel through a dozen states, totaling more than 3,000 miles, she said.

Santa Fe County Commissioner Anna Hansen, who helped organize the town hall meeting, said if the plutonium is going to be shipped to Savannah River, the federal government should build an East Coast repository for it instead of sending it back to New Mexico.

The federal government also should quit producing new plutonium pits, which will create even more waste that must be dealt with, Hansen said.

Eletha Trujillo, WIPP’s program manager, said the nuclear waste that’s transported in fortified containers known as TRUPACTs is extremely well protected.

The lids alone weigh 4,000 pounds each, making it virtually impossible for hijackers to gain access to the waste barrels, she said.

The trucks are set to go no faster than 65 mph to minimize the chances of a serious accident, Trujillo said, adding the trucks are constantly tracked and monitored.

“I know where every truck is in the U.S. if it’s leaving the WIPP site,” she said.

While the diluted plutonium shipped from Savannah River will be in those containers, Hancock said, the oxide powder departing from the Los Alamos lab will not.

The Energy Department originally sought to build a Savannah River facility that could turn Cold War plutonium into a mixed oxide fuel for commercial nuclear plants.

But after billions of dollars in cost overruns and years of delays, the Trump administration scrapped the project and decided to go with diluting and disposing of the waste. Meanwhile, plans call for turning Savannah River’s defunct mixed-oxide facility into a plutonium pit plant.

Hancock said there is no other method for getting rid of surplus plutonium, so Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm will likely stick with the plan she inherited.

Hansen said she would prefer if Los Alamos were not involved. And the federal government should find a way to dilute and dispose of the waste in one area rather than shipping it thousands of miles, which increases the chance of an accident, she said. “The more we move it around, the more danger we are projecting onto our citizens.”

 

Enviros Ask One Regulator to Push Another on Three Mile Island Water Use: ExchangeMonitor
21 Oct 2021

An environmental watchdog group wants Pennsylvania’s environmental protection office to pressure an interstate regulator to step in on water use at Three Mile Island Nuclear Generating Station, according to a request the group sent this week. Three Mile Island… [Subscription Required]
An environmental watchdog group wants Pennsylvania’s environmental protection office to pressure an interstate regulator to step in on water use at Three Mile Island Nuclear Generating Station, according to a request the group sent this week. Three Mile Island…
[Subscription Required]

 

DOE awards $50 million to Exelon for control room modernisation: Nuclear Engineering International
22 Oct 2021

The US Department of Energy (DOE) has awarded a $50 million cost-share with Exelon Generation to digitalise the control room at Limerick Generating Station in Pennsylvania. Once implemented, the facility will house the first fully digital safety system upgrade at a US nuclear power plant. “Through this partnership, DOE and Exelon will pave the way for modernisation of control room systems across the US nuclear fleet,” said Dr Kathryn D Huff, Acting Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy. “These upgrades will strengthen the case for extending the operation of US nuclear plants into the future, ensuring we maintain access to our nation’s largest source of emissions-free electricity.”
The US Department of Energy (DOE) has awarded a $50 million cost-share with Exelon Generation to digitalise the control room at Limerick Generating Station in Pennsylvania. Once implemented, the facility will house the first fully digital safety system upgrade at a US nuclear power plant.
“Through this partnership, DOE and Exelon will pave the way for modernisation of control room systems across the US nuclear fleet,” said Dr Kathryn D Huff, Acting Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy. “These upgrades will strengthen the case for extending the operation of US nuclear plants into the future, ensuring we maintain access to our nation’s largest source of emissions-free electricity.”

Control room digitalisation will enable automation, decrease system interruptions, and improve performance. Ultimately, this will improve operations and reduce costs significantly. As part of the agreement, Exelon will contribute $42 million to the cost-share. The company has retained Westinghouse Electric Company to replace the analogue Reactor Protection System, as well as several other safety-related systems, with digitalised controllers over the next five years.

This effort marks the first fully digital safety system modernisation using the new ISG-06 Alternate Review Process protocol, which optimizes the process of licensing digital safety system upgrades.

The results of this effort will be directly applicable to other US boiling water reactors, which represent about one third of the existing nuclear fleet. Pressurised water reactors will also be able to apply the results to inform their own digitalisation efforts. Advanced reactor developers will be able to apply the lessons learned to future reactor demonstrations, DOE said.

 

Related News
Idaho nuclear waste plant to get go-ahead: Associated Press
21 Oct 2021 , Keith Ridler

Problems plaguing a nuclear waste treatment plant in eastern Idaho appear to be solved, U.S. officials said Thursday, and converting high-level liquid waste into safer, more easily managed solid material could start early next year. Joel Case of the U.S. Department of Energy said a test startup without waste will begin next week at the Integrated Waste Treatment Unit at the Energy Department’s 890-square-mile site that includes the Idaho National Laboratory.
Problems plaguing a nuclear waste treatment plant in eastern Idaho appear to be solved, U.S. officials said Thursday, and converting high-level liquid waste into safer, more easily managed solid material could start early next year.
Joel Case of the U.S. Department of Energy said a test startup without waste will begin next week at the Integrated Waste Treatment Unit at the Energy Department’s 890-square-mile site that includes the Idaho National Laboratory.

“I’m very confident that we can fix the actual process issues,” he said during a meeting of the Idaho Cleanup Project Citizens Advisory Board.

The 900,000 gallons of sodium-bearing, radioactive waste comes from processing spent nuclear fuel to recover highly enriched uranium. The waste is in tanks above a giant aquifer that supplies water to cities and farms in the region.

The waste has been a sore spot between Idaho and the Energy Department for years, Case said, and the federal agency is paying $6,000 in fines a day for missing a deadline to transform the liquid waste into solid material as stipulated in a 1995 agreement that was the culmination of a series of federal lawsuits.

Idaho, because of the missed 2013 deadline, is preventing the Energy Department from bringing in research quantities of spent nuclear fuel to be studied at the lab. Scientists say the spent fuel is needed to develop new technologies for the next wave of nuclear reactors that’s part of a U.S. strategy to expand nuclear power and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

The prohibition could also damage the lab’s status as one of the nation’s top nuclear research labs, Energy Department officials have said. Additionally, the lab is one of the state’s largest employers and a huge economic driver, especially in eastern Idaho.

 

Texts detail how Ohio regulator gave FirstEnergy inside help: Associated Press
21 Oct 2021 , Mark Gillispie, Julie Carr Smyth

Newly surfaced texts between FirstEnergy Corp. executives detail a series of favors delivered to the company by Ohio's top utility regulator, a man under scrutiny in an ongoing federal corruption probe...About five months later, federal authorities accused FirstEnergy of secretly funding an elaborate $60 million bribery scheme to elect a new Ohio House speaker. The company hoped the new speaker would pass legislation bailing out two nuclear plants operated at the time by a wholly-owned FirstEnergy subsidiary, and then quash a ballot effort to repeal the law.
Newly surfaced texts between FirstEnergy Corp. executives detail a series of favors delivered to the company by Ohio's top utility regulator, a man under scrutiny in an ongoing federal corruption probe.
Akron-based FirstEnergy had a friend on the inside in early 2020: Sam Randazzo, chair of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio. Randazzo resigned last November after an FBI search of his home and revelations that top FirstEnergy executives had approved paying him $4.3 million, weeks before his appointment as Ohio's top utility regulator in 2019.

The March 2020 texts between the two executives — who have since been fired — represent a new peek into the specifics of what Randazzo did on the company's behalf.

CEO Chuck Jones and senior vice president Dennis Chack wrote that Randazzo's help included overruling utilities commission staff and commissioners on a revenue guarantee in a now-tainted 2019 energy bill.

Randazzo also helped with “burning” an updated audit report on FirstEnergy charging customers $456 million — charges later deemed improper by the state Supreme Court. The customer charges were intended for grid modernization, but instead, FirstEnergy used the money to create a lending pool that its subsidiary electric companies, including those outside Ohio, could draw from.

“He (Randazzo) will get it done for us but cannot just jettison all process,” Jones texted Chack, adding that Randazzo’s help had led to “a lot of talk going on in the halls of PUCO about does he work there or for us?”

About five months later, federal authorities accused FirstEnergy of secretly funding an elaborate $60 million bribery scheme to elect a new Ohio House speaker. The company hoped the new speaker would pass legislation bailing out two nuclear plants operated at the time by a wholly-owned FirstEnergy subsidiary, and then quash a ballot effort to repeal the law.

The text exchange was obtained the Ohio Consumers’ Counsel Bruce Weston in a subpoena issued to the utilities commission for investigative documents concerning FirstEnergy and the bribery scandal.

“We are pursuing justice for FirstEnergy consumers at the PUCO, where there has not been enough of it,” Weston said in a statement Thursday.

FirstEnergy signed a deferred prosecution agreement in July that called for the company to pay $230 million in penalties and abide by a long list of reform measures to avoid criminal charges. The company, in a statement attached to the agreement, described its role in the bribery scheme and how the company benefited from Randazzo’s help.

Randazzo has not been criminally charged and has denied wrongdoing. A message seeking comment from his attorney was not immediately returned.

Ties between passage of the nuclear bailout bill and FirstEnergy’s bribery efforts were first laid bare in July 2020, when federal authorities arrested then-House Speaker Larry Householder and four others on conspiracy charges. Householder has pleaded not guilty and awaits trial.

FirstEnergy fired Jones, Chack and senior vice president Michael Dowling in October 2020 for violating the company's policies and code of conduct. None have been criminally charged. Jones has said he did nothing wrong. A spokesperson for Jones did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Thursday.

FirstEnergy spokesperson Jennifer Young declined comment on the text messages.

Gillispie reported from Cleveland.

This story has been corrected to show FirstEnergy's spokesperson is Jennifer Young, not Jennifer Thornton.

 

International Nuclear News
Japan OKs plan to push clean energy, nuclear to cut carbon: Associated Press
22 Oct 2021 , Mari Yamaguchi

Japan adopted a new energy policy on Friday that promotes nuclear and renewables as sources of clean energy to achieve the country’s pledge of reaching carbon neutrality in 2050. The new basic energy plan, adopted by the Cabinet just in time for the climate summit in early November, calls for drastically increasing use of renewable energy to cut fossil fuel consumption over the next decade as Japan pushes to meet its ambitious emissions reduction target.
Japan adopted a new energy policy on Friday that promotes nuclear and renewables as sources of clean energy to achieve the country’s pledge of reaching carbon neutrality in 2050.
The new basic energy plan, adopted by the Cabinet just in time for the climate summit in early November, calls for drastically increasing use of renewable energy to cut fossil fuel consumption over the next decade as Japan pushes to meet its ambitious emissions reduction target.

Japan has been undecided over what to do about its nuclear power industry since the 2011 Fukushima plant disaster. It now says reactor restarts are key to meeting emissions targets as Japan tries to step up in the global effort against climate change.

The 128-page plan compiled by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry says Japan should set ambitious targets for hydrogen and ammonia energy, carbon recycling and nuclear energy. It also calls for promoting offshore wind power and use of rechargeable batteries that have potential for growth.

“We will mobilize all options” to achieve the emissions target, the plan said, adding that the “supply of stable and low-cost energy is a prerequisite.”

The changes in the plan are meant to achieve the carbon emissions reduction target announced in April by former Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga. His successor, Fumio Kishida, a backer of nuclear plant restarts, took office this month.

Japan has pledged to reduce its emissions by 46% from 2013 levels, up from an earlier target of 26%, to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050. Japan says it would try to push the reduction as high as 50% to be in line with the European Union’s commitment. China has pledged to be carbon neutral by 2060.

The energy plan says renewables should account for 36-38% of the power supply in 2030, up from the current target of 22-24%, and that newly introduced fuels such as hydrogen and ammonia should comprise 1%.

The target for fossil fuel use was slashed to 41% in 2030 from 56%. The plan said Japan will reduce dependence on fossil fuel without setting a timeline. It said Japan will abide by a Group of Seven pledge earlier this year to stop providing overseas assistance for coal-fired generation projects that lack emissions reduction measures.

The 2050 emissions-free target has prompted calls to expedite restarts of nuclear plants. Progress toward reducing Japan’s reliance on fossil fuels has been hindered by the prolonged closure of most of its nuclear plants after the Fukushima disaster in 2011.

The plan keeps the target for nuclear power unchanged at 20-22%. Japan says it aims to reduce its reliance on nuclear power as much as possible but that nuclear will remain an important energy source. Experts say a phase out is unlikely anytime soon.

Economy and industry minister Koichi Hagiuda has said “drastic energy conservation, maximum promotion of renewables and safe restarts of nuclear reactors” are key.

Japan will continue its nuclear fuel reprocessing cycle, in which spent nuclear fuel is converted to plutonium, despite the failure of its Monju plutonium-burning reactor and international concerns over safeguards for its plutonium stockpile.

A government taskforce will “accelerate” restarts of reactors, which have been slowed by stricter safety standards set after the Fukushima meltdowns, the plan says.

It did not mention the possibility of new reactors, despite such calls from some industry officials and pro-nuclear lawmakers. Japan is pursuing research and development of small modular reactors, or SMRs, considered a clean, affordable and safer nuclear power options in the future.

The atomic energy target will be difficult to achieve because of persistent anti-nuclear sentiment among the public and more time-consuming safety checks by the authorities. The energy plan gave no numerical targets, but experts say the 20-22% target would require restarts of about 30 reactors.

Twenty-four of Japan’s 54 workable reactors were assigned to be decommissioned after the Fukushima disaster, as utility companies opted to scrap old reactors rather than invest heavily in added safety measures required under stricter post-Fukushima standards. Only 10 reactors have restarted over the past decade.

 

Steam Leak Forces Russian Nuclear Reactor Offline: RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty
21 Oct 2021

A reactor at a nuclear power plant in Russia's southwestern Rostov region was taken offline after the detection of a steam leak, but the operator said radiation levels were normal. "The second power unit was disconnected from the network for routine maintenance of thermal and mechanical equipment," Rosenergoatom, a subsidiary of the state nuclear agency Rosatom, said on October 21.
A reactor at a nuclear power plant in Russia's southwestern Rostov region was taken offline after the detection of a steam leak, but the operator said radiation levels were normal.
"The second power unit was disconnected from the network for routine maintenance of thermal and mechanical equipment," Rosenergoatom, a subsidiary of the state nuclear agency Rosatom, said on October 21.

Earlier in the day, workers at the Rostov nuclear power plant found an 18-millimeter crack in a welded joint on a pipe used to control humidity and steam levels.

Rosenergoatom said the pipe carries nonradioactive water.

Russia's public-health watchdog, Rospotrebnadzor, said in statement that the level of radiation at the site was normal.

The four-unit nuclear power plant is located on the bank of the Tsimlyansk water-storage basin, 250 kilometers from the regional capital, Rostov-on-Don.

 

Steam Leak Detected at Russian Nuclear Plant: Agence France-Presse
21 Oct 2021

Russia said Thursday it had taken offline a reactor at a nuclear plant in the south of the country after detecting a steam leak, but said radiation levels were normal. The state nuclear agency operates 38 reactors — mostly built during the Soviet period at 11 nuclear power stations across the country. The second of four reactors at the Rostov Nuclear Power Plant was taken offline Thursday for repairs after a steam leak was detected at 21:54 GMT on Wednesday, said Rosenergoatom, a subsidiary of the state nuclear agency Rosatom.
Russia said Thursday it had taken offline a reactor at a nuclear plant in the south of the country after detecting a steam leak, but said radiation levels were normal.
The state nuclear agency operates 38 reactors — mostly built during the Soviet period at 11 nuclear power stations across the country.

The second of four reactors at the Rostov Nuclear Power Plant was taken offline Thursday for repairs after a steam leak was detected at 21:54 GMT on Wednesday, said Rosenergoatom, a subsidiary of the state nuclear agency Rosatom.

The operator of the country's nuclear power plants said the leak was due to a welding defect on an 18-millimetук pipe carrying non-radioactive water in the reactor's steam generator.

Rosenergoatom spokesman Andrei Timonov told AFP the incident posed no danger.

"There was a thin trickle of steam," he said. "We will repair everything in two days," he said, adding that the pipe had to cool down for repairs.

Radiation levels at the plant near the city of Volgodonsk were "in line with normal background levels," Rosenergoatom said.

Russia is one of the world's largest producers of nuclear energy, and officials sporadically report operating faults.

The Kremlin is aiming to position itself as a key exporter of nuclear energy services, and Rosatom is working on projects in countries including Egypt and India.

The Soviet Union was home to the world's worst nuclear disaster when an explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in 1986 sent radioactive fallout across Europe.

 

Head of Chernobyl nuclear reactor - who was sentenced to 10 years' hard labour in 'last of the show trials' after it exploded in 1986 – dies aged 85: Mail Online
21 Oct 2021 , Bhvishya Patel

The head of the Chernobyl power plant who was sentenced to ten years at a labour camp for his part in the nuclear disaster has died at the age of 85. Viktor Bryukhanov was the manager of Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in Pripyat, northern Ukraine, when an explosion at reactor four spewed radiation over the region, including parts of Belarus and Europe, in April 1986.
The head of the Chernobyl power plant who was sentenced to ten years at a labour camp for his part in the nuclear disaster has died at the age of 85.
Viktor Bryukhanov was the manager of Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in Pripyat, northern Ukraine, when an explosion at reactor four spewed radiation over the region, including parts of Belarus and Europe, in April 1986.

The blast, which emitted more than 400 times the amount of radiation into the atmosphere than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945, occurred during a safety test and saw Soviet authorities take 36 hours to launch a full-scale evacuation.

At least 31 workers died in the days after the accident, although the long-term impact of the radiation was harder to quantify - and at least 350,000 people were evacuated out of the area in the months following the disaster.

In the aftermath of the explosion, Bryukhanov was made a scapegoat and he and five other defendants were sentenced to ten years hard labour at a penal colony in Donetsk in was described as 'one of the last show trials' of the communist era.

Viktor Bryukhanov was the head of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor in Pripyat, Ukraine, when an explosion at reactor four spewed radiation across the region in 1986

During the closed trial, Bryukhanov was found guilty of abuse of power and given a concurrent five-year sentence.

Born in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, in 1935, Bryukhanov was the oldest of four children and his father worked as a glazier while his mother was a cleaner.

He studied electrical engineering at Tashkent’s Polytechnic Institute before moving to Ukraine in 1966.

In 1970, Bryukhanov, who was just 34 at the time, joined the team in charge of building the Chernobyl plant beside the Pripyat river, north of Kiev.

After 14 years, he and his colleagues succeeded in building the VI Lenin Nuclear Power Station with its four RBMK nuclear reactors on an isolated stretch of marshland.

However in 1986 disaster struck when an explosion at reactor number 4 spewed radioactive dust across Europe in the world's worst nuclear accident.

Within several months, 31 workers died either from the explosion or from acute radiation sickness.

Around 600,000 people had exposure to radiation at elevated levels while fighting the fire at the plant or working to clean up the contamination.

The accident exposed millions in the region to dangerous levels of radiation and forced a permanent evacuation of about 350,000 people from hundreds of towns and villages in Ukraine and Belarus.

A week after the disaster, radioactive particles in rain also fell on North Wales and for more than a quarter of a century, all Welsh lamb produced for human consumption was monitored for radioactivity.

The disaster's eventual death toll has been subject to speculation and dispute, but the World Health Organization's cancer research arm has estimated that 9,000 people would die of exposure-related cancer and leukemia if Chernobyl disaster's health effects followed a similar pattern to the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombings

The giant structure built to confine radioactive debris at the nuclear reactor is estimated to have cost 1.5 billion euros (almost £1.35 billion) to build, and the entire project cost 2.2 billion euros (about £1.9 billion).

The complex construction effort to secure the molten reactor's core and 200 tons of highly radioactive material took nine years to complete under the auspices of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

The blast emitted 400 times the amount of radiation into the atmosphere than the atomic bomb in Hiroshima

Bryukhanov was told the radiation levels were 100 times higher than normal but initially suggested the instrument was faulty

Bryukhanov had been at his home when he was awoken by a call alerting him to the nuclear explosion.

When he was told by the station's civil defence chief that the radiation levels were 100 times higher than normal, Bryukhanov suggested the instrument must be faulty and initially sent a report to his superiors stating the situation was stable.

When asked in 1992 why immediate steps to evacuate people were not taken Bryukhanov told Reuters: 'Everyone knew that according to the requirements, it was necessary to evacuate people. But as usual with us, it was ''Let's listen to Moscow. Let's sort things out and take instructions from them''.

'Evacuation meant moving masses of people and taking on a huge responsibility. Therefore probably, in my opinion, they were looking for someone higher up to take that decision.'

Weeks after the explosion, party officials took the decision to fire Bryukhanov as head of the power plant and during a closed trial he was found guilty of gross violation of safety regulations, creating conditions that led to an explosion.

He accepted professional responsibility but denied criminal liability.

Following his release from prison, Bryukhanov moved to Kiev with his wife in 1992 and lived a largely reclusive life.

Viktor Bryukhanov is survived by his wife Valentina and by their daughter and son.

In 2019, actor Con O'Neill starred as Bryukhanov in the television drama Chernobyl written by Craig Mazin and directed by Johan Renck.

 

Naftali Bennett, Vladimir Putin to meet in Russia tomorrow: The Jerusalem Post
21 Oct 2021 , Lahav Harkov

Prime Minister Naftali Bennett and Russian President Vladimir Putin plan to meet in Sochi, Russia, on Friday. As of press time on Thursday, Bennett had yet to make a final decision about whether to allow tourists who have received the Russian Sputnik-V coronavirus vaccine to enter Israel. He had considered adding Sputnik-V to the list of accepted vaccines as a gesture to Putin, despite the Health Ministry’s objections.
Prime Minister Naftali Bennett and Russian President Vladimir Putin plan to meet in Sochi, Russia, on Friday.
As of press time on Thursday, Bennett had yet to make a final decision about whether to allow tourists who have received the Russian Sputnik-V coronavirus vaccine to enter Israel. He had considered adding Sputnik-V to the list of accepted vaccines as a gesture to Putin, despite the Health Ministry’s objections.

Tourists with at least two doses of the Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Janssen (Johnson and Johnson), Sinovac or Sinopharm vaccines will be allowed to enter Israel as of November 1.

Approving the Sputnik-V vaccine “isn’t really coming up for discussion, and Israel will approve it when the World Health Organization does,” Housing and Construction Minister Ze’ev Elkin (New Hope), who translated Putin’s Russian remarks for former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and will do the same for Bennett on Friday, told Army Radio on Thursday.

Bennett and Putin plan to discuss diplomatic, security and economic matters, as well as regional issues, foremost of which is the Iranian nuclear threat, the Prime Minister’s Office said.

Moscow supports reinstating the 2015 nuclear deal, which would limit Tehran’s uranium enrichment while lifting sanctions, and has been encouraging Iran to rejoin it. Israel opposes the deal.

Bennett’s visit to Sochi, a Black Sea resort town where Putin has a home, came at the Russian president’s invitation. The two spoke on the phone earlier this month.

The visit also comes amid friction in the deconfliction mechanism between Israel and Russia in Syria, where the Russian Army maintains a presence. Israel attacks Iranian assets in Syria, which could try to establish themselves on Israel’s northern border or transfer weapons to Hezbollah.

In August, the Russian military in Syria said its air-defense systems had shot down 22 of 24 missiles launched by Israel into Syria. Two weeks later, a Russian-made missile launched from Syria landed in central Israel.

 

Opinions
A Nuclear Renaissance Could Soon Begin: Medium.com
21 Oct 2021 , Ella Alderson

The irony of nuclear power is that despite it being one of the safest forms of energy available, its use has declined over the years in no small part due to public concern. Very few accidents have ever taken place at nuclear power plants. Yet when they do the results are nightmarish catastrophes which have turned people against it. However, in comparison to coal it produces 330 times fewer deaths. Compared to oil the number is 263 times fewer and compared to gas it’s 38 times fewer. Overall nuclear power is over 97% safer than coal, oil, or gas.
The irony of nuclear power is that despite it being one of the safest forms of energy available, its use has declined over the years in no small part due to public concern. Very few accidents have ever taken place at nuclear power plants. Yet when they do the results are nightmarish catastrophes which have turned people against it. However, in comparison to coal it produces 330 times fewer deaths. Compared to oil the number is 263 times fewer and compared to gas it’s 38 times fewer. Overall nuclear power is over 97% safer than coal, oil, or gas.
It’s also an essential component for our transition to a clean power grid. Solar and wind cannot provide power 24 hours a day, hence the gaps in energy production must be filled by another source. Like nuclear.

Nuclear is by far the most reliable and potent of all energy sources, but this reliability comes at a high price. The construction of a single plant is a complex project that can take around 7 years and billions of dollars to complete. Because most people do not want them constructed near the city, high voltage power cables represent an additional cost for carrying electricity between the city and the plant.

Once they’re built and producing power, the cost per kilowatt (kW) can be significantly higher than that of a gas plant. The difference can be as big as $6,000 per kW versus $850 per kW for gas. Gas plants also only cost in the hundreds of millions — not billions — to build and are finished in just a couple of years. This is why some countries are still opting to invest money into building new gas power plants for cheap power even as scientific opinion warns against it. It’s an easy decision to justify when the cost of nuclear has risen and not fallen over the years. It is now the second most expensive form of power generation behind gas peaker plants.

So what if there was something to alleviate many of the problems nuclear presents? What if there was something that could make it much more appealing to build in terms of cost, safety, simplicity, and time?

There is a reason many people say that Small Modular Reactors (SMRs) are the future of nuclear energy. As the name implies, SMRs are smaller, stackable versions of full-size power plants. The reactors themselves can be about 65 feet tall and sit inside containment vessels that are 76 feet tall. Their much simpler and more compact design means that SMRs can be factory built and then transported via rail or ship.

Inside the containment chamber there is a pool of water which is heated as it passes over the core. Using a series of tubes and turbines, as well as the natural effects of gravity and buoyancy, each SMR is fully capable of generating steam without need for pumps or complicated safety measures. In case of an accident SMRs will naturally slow down their reactions using properties such as pressure differences and heat convection. The key is to take the steam generating and heat exchanging components of a full-size plant and orchestrate them into an elegant, compact module.

A single module of 77 Megawatts (MW) can provide enough carbon-free power to sustain 60,000 homes at a reliability level of over 99%. Their modularity means, of course, that more than one unit can be installed at any given location. Depending on the module design some may even be installed underground in order to protect them from natural disasters, such as the one which caused the Fukushima meltdown.

As opposed to larger power plants that need to be shut down and refueled every 24 months, refueling times for more efficient SMRs can be as long as 20 years. Their ability to be factory produced and their decreased reliance on operative workers also means they have shorter construction times and a cost as low as $3 billion as opposed to over $10 billion for a traditional nuclear plant.

One example of innovative SMR designs come from a company called NuScale whose modules could save $4 billion over traditional plants and could produce 720 MW in an area of just 35 acres. This same energy production from a traditional plant would require nearly 18 times that amount of land. As compared to renewables like solar and wind, SMRs could generate the same amount of power in just 1% of the space.

While their size does come with all these added benefits, there is of course the obvious fact that SMRs do not produce as much power as a traditional plant. They produce less than 300 MW. This is paltry in comparison to the 1,600 MW of a normal plant, but SMRs aren’t meant to work on their own. They are meant primarily to supplement the grid in order to make other carbon-free energy sources like wind and solar more feasible. Their scalability does bring the opportunity to generate more power but increasing the number of reactors also increases the probability that something might go wrong. Another safety issue arises when we consider that the passive safety features used by SMR modules are still susceptible to accidents, such as hydrogen explosions. They may end up requiring backup safety mechanisms that could dramatically increase their production cost.

Still, their potential benefits have been enough to attract a lot of attention and investments from several different countries. In the US, the company NuScale was awarded $1.35 billion by the Department of Energy and promises the country will have its first running SMR power plant within the next 9 years. Once online their target is a levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) of $65/MWh, a number that’s neither terrible nor ideal. Their design was the first to receive U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission approval. TerraPower, founded and funded by Bill Gates, is also working on SMR development. Overseas China has approved their SMR ACP100 project and Russia is constructing their RITM-200N plant to provide SMR power by 2028.

Besides making SMRs more efficient and cost competitive, so too do we have to worry about the bigger overall problem of nuclear waste. As spent fuel continues to sit in temporary storage for decades, some of this waste has begun to leak out of their containers. Increasing our number of reactors would only worsen this problem, though there are many proposed solutions such as recycling the waste in a new kind of reactor that runs on spent fuel.

There is an obvious link between energy and the future of mankind. The better we can learn to harness one, the more advanced the other can become. Our goal is to have a more harmonious relationship between our growing energy needs and the demand we place on the planet. Nuclear power is a necessary component of this cleaner grid, and SMRs may well be its upcoming future.

 

Nuclear power, like that at Georgia's Plant Vogtle, is necessary for Biden’s energy goals: Savannah Morning News [GA]
21 Oct 2021 , Charlotte Whelan

President Joe Biden has made climate activism a central component of his presidential platform since day one on the campaign trail. But his approach is nothing new: Demonize reliable, affordable energy and limit American industries in the name of saving the planet and averting climate change. The only difference is Biden hasn’t hidden the need to overhaul our economy to meet his ambitious goals. While setting up his new administration, Biden made clear that he wanted climate change addressed in all sectors—an approach his Treasury Secretary, Janet Yellen described: “President Biden has outlined an ambitious strategy to transition the United States to net-zero emissions and has mobilized the entire government to achieve it… At Treasury, our goal is to take this ‘whole of government’ approach and turn it into a ‘whole of economy’ approach.”
Policy analyst argues that nuclear power has a critical role to play in the Biden administration's climate goals.
Charlotte Whelan is a policy analyst at the Independent Women’s Forum and a member of the Steamboat Institute’s Emerging Leaders Council. She wrote this for InsideSources.com.

President Joe Biden has made climate activism a central component of his presidential platform since day one on the campaign trail. But his approach is nothing new: Demonize reliable, affordable energy and limit American industries in the name of saving the planet and averting climate change. The only difference is Biden hasn’t hidden the need to overhaul our economy to meet his ambitious goals.

While setting up his new administration, Biden made clear that he wanted climate change addressed in all sectors—an approach his Treasury Secretary, Janet Yellen described: “President Biden has outlined an ambitious strategy to transition the United States to net-zero emissions and has mobilized the entire government to achieve it… At Treasury, our goal is to take this ‘whole of government’ approach and turn it into a ‘whole of economy’ approach.”

The problem is this “whole of economy approach” won’t be good for the economy. At a moment when our economy continues to struggle, the Biden administration continually makes broad claims about all the jobs and opportunities that its climate change strategy will produce. But after months of touting those new jobs, the White House released a white paper where it admitted: “clean energy jobs will not automatically provide high salaries or sufficient protections.” And that “without a Federal strategy for the transition, well-paying jobs could be lost, and new, well-paying jobs may not be created.”

More opinions on nuclear power:Going nuclear over Plant Vogtle’s problematic nuclear reactors

So the Biden administration is selling policies that will weaken our energy security, raise energy prices for Americans, and make us more dependent on foreign nations without assurances that we’ll reduce carbon emissions in any meaningful way or even create better jobs for Americans.

Faced with such an offer, independent-minded Americans must be asking: Is there another way? American innovation says yes.

The Biden administration isn’t wrong that renewable energy sources like wind and solar power have greatly improved in cost and efficiency in recent years, and their increased use is some proof of that. But the reality is that renewable energy sources remain capable of meeting only a small fraction of our energy demands. Enter nuclear power.

While the U.S. has used nuclear power since 1958, our nuclear power levels have remained the same for three decades. In contrast, France embraced the power source back in the 1970s as a way to improve their energy security by decreasing their reliance on oil from the OPEC nations. Since then, the country has enjoyed reliable, cheap, carbon-free power that it has used domestically and even sells to surrounding countries.

France’s approach to nuclear power has been wildly successful. Not only does it bring revenue into the country and keep energy prices low for consumers, but France also generates less than one-tenth of Germany’s carbon emissions at nearly half the cost. Germany, which has been hailed as a leader in renewable energy and fighting climate change, is far behind nuclear-loving France.

Ironically, as France has recently succumbed to pressure from surrounding EU countries such as Germany to increase its share of renewable energy, it has been forced to increase its use of natural gas to overcome the shortfall created by its decrease use of nuclear power, thus leading to higher emissions produced by the country.

To be fair, there are signs the Biden administration is waking up to the reality that to fight climate change, nuclear power must be in the mix. Energy Secretary Granholm recently said: “Carbon-free nuclear power is an absolutely critical part of our decarbonization equation.” She continued to recognize that we need to preserve our current nuclear fleet and deploy new nuclear technologies already in development.

While these remarks provide hope that the Biden administration is becoming more realistic about America’s clean energy future, there is still a long fight ahead as many climate activists still oppose increasing nuclear power in any way. Until now, Biden has been friendly to progressive climate activists but he’ll have to break with them to embrace nuclear power.

If Biden really wants to reduce U.S. carbon emissions and fight climate change, he should take a cue from France and Germany and apply those lessons to our own energy sector. We don’t need to remake our entire economy to fight climate change. We need to make smart decisions that will decrease our carbon footprint while keeping energy affordable.